[Music]
so as an astrophysicist I often get
asked what do you actually do all day
and I respond with well I try to answer
questions that no one knows the answer
to but that's kind of still hard to wrap
your head around so I figured the best
way to get that across is to show you
and bring you along with my day so this
is my office in the physics building I
love it it has glass walls I have right
on and feel like house solving a mystery
for us it's never aliens like it's never
lupus the first thing I did though was
check whether my code has been running
okay overnight and it's not rushed as
you can tell from my happy dance it did
this is a code that tries to find the
best model of the star formation history
in a galaxy given the light that we
observed from it
I call it snitch because it's seeking
the best model anyway my terrible puns
aside it's got lots more galaxies to run
on so time to make myself a drink
now you might think I'm off to make a
cup of tea but for fear of getting
kicked out of Britain for saying this I
don't like tea I don't like coffee
either so I'm having a hot squash
because it's really cold out which is
not a vegetable for all you Americans
watching it's like a concentrated fruit
juice that you can have either hot or
cold this is Apple and blackcurrant
flavored I'm not really used to drinking
hot drinks though so sometimes it's too
hot for me ouch
but anyway time to actually start some
work so the first thing I do every
morning is write that's do list in my
bullet journal I love bullet journaling
it kept me organized enough to write my
PhD in two months which is crazy after
that though I picked some tunes and then
get to clearing my inbox and replying to
some emails you know get a mix of emails
in a day buy some from subscribers with
questions
and then lots of science emails from
collaborators sending draft journal
articles through or a new plot that
they've made that people are discussing
on the thread as well to work out what
it means those like favorite kind of
emails an email yet every day though is
from what we called the archive preprint
server which is essentially an archive
for all of the astronomy journal
articles but allows you free access
before the general to publish them and
the email basically sends me a big a
list of all of them have been posted
that day so I'll scan down the list I'll
pick out ones that I think are relevant
to my research or just generally
interesting really and I'll give those a
quick read often I'll read the abstract
which is kinda like the blurb or the
summary of what they found and I'll look
at the figures and the captions and
maybe read the conclusions as well I
disappear here for a sec because I've
gone to the printer to grab the one that
I've printed out to take to journal Club
later which is where a couple of us get
together and we discuss the latest
results so I'm back and I've now started
to do a little bit of research so I
wrote a journal article two years ago
that compared this star formation
history sort of the history of star
formation in a galaxy for those that
rotates and for those that don't like a
spiral galaxy versus like a blob galaxy
where the stars are on chaotic orbits
and I made a prediction at the end of
that paper that said that the ones that
rotate should contain more hydrogen gas
than the ones that don't now the data I
needed to do that at the time didn't
exist but now there's been this big
survey to try and get the amount of
hydrogen gas in a big sample of galaxies
and it's the sample that I originally
drew my two hundred galaxies of rotating
a non-rotating from so I grabbed that
data and I got to grips with it a bit
before I matched it to my old data to
start with Oh someone popped in at this
point for a chat about plans next night
but then back to the data you can see
I've been making a plot of the
distribution of the amount of hydrogen
gas in each galaxy so for the rotating
ones in comparing it to the non-rotating
ones emotionally it wasn't very
conclusive because even though I started
with about 200 galaxies when
I matched it to the new dataset which
isn't quite complete yet at taking all
the galaxies I only ended up with 40 of
them and only three of those with the
numbers hating ones now that can tell us
a lot it means that a lot of the number
of chasing ones probably didn't have
detection in the first place as also
they probably don't have as much gas in
them like I predicted the three galaxies
doesn't consent thank you if we could
statistics so I'll need to do a test
later on on that to confirm all the data
crunching know has made me hungry so
it's a good job that Thursdays at 11:00
is tea time in the physics department so
I have to head all the way upstairs so
I'm not good when I get at the top but
it's a very nice view though and you get
to walk past Jocelyn Bell Burnell
surface where the casual picture of her
with Barack Obama outside you know just
for some inspiration in your day anyway
it is opposed to advertising the big
public talk we've got tonight from Hina
Falcon one of the members of the event
horizon team who took that really famous
picture of the black hole back in March
that for now two prominent gathers to
chat over tea and most importantly
cookies then it's a mad dash over to the
new physics building it's about three
physics building over three minutes walk
of each other and when there's a seminar
on you have to be ready to dash between
them even in the rain like today today
the seminar will be given by Heiner
Falco unlike his talk this evening which
is aimed at the public this one is for
those experts to catch up on his latest
work so we can ask him questions and
figure out how it fits in with the
science that each of us are doing so
high-nosed talk was all about his
efforts along with a spoon for postdocs
and students to understand growing
supermassive black holes
these are black holes that are millions
to billions of times more massive than
the Sun and they're found in the Centers
of galaxies now whilst I focus on how
supermassive black holes
affect the galaxies they live in Heino
focuses on what's happening on the
smaller scales directly around the black
hole
specifically modeling the inflow of the
material around the event horizon that
point of no return where you have to be
traveling from the speed of light to
escape and these models that Heino and
its crew
and then be directly compared to the
image that the event horizon team are
taking off say Messier 87 the famous
when they released early this year and
the black hole at the center of the
Milky Way such Terrace a star so of
course all the questions were then on
when we could expect the Sagittarius a
star image like the one they took that
make c7
the answer was don't hold your breath
they're still working on it but a bit of
a slower healthier pace than they did
with the MH 7 one after that's finished
it's time to go get lunch which is back
over towards building I work in now you
would think the most likely place to
find an astro business in Oxford is the
astrophysics building but not at lunch
time the most likely place then is
Taylor's deli and it's great having such
a good deli so close by to the
department it's so easy today I've gone
for a nice salad because after the big
public talk tonight we'll actually be
taking the speaker to dinner in college
and that will be super rich food I'm
very excited for but until then we have
to go back to the department canteen to
find well everybody else really because
well everybody needs a break in midday
which is why in department full of
physicists it's sometimes hard not to
end up talking about physics at lunch
but most of us don't just because we
need a break from thinking about it our
desks and seminars all day too
so we try and just have a laugh at Paul
on the right here is just past his visor
that's the PhD defense where two
examiner's like read your thesis and
question you on everything you've
written in it and check that you know
your stuff and then that's when you
become a doctor when you pass so we were
congratulating him on passing and asking
him how it went and now it feels to be a
doctor now anyway can't sit around all
day so back to the author as we go
through some more science or in my case
apparently quickly check emails and
quickly check Twitter my phone has been
doing all the recording today so I'm
missing this little quick bits of code
and procrastination in my day anyway
Here I am reading up on some notes I
made for my night sky news video that
went up last week because I also talked
about the same thing each week on BBC
Radio Oxford with Lily Mitchell Lily is
great she lets me come on the radio for
half an hour each month and talk about
anything from Jupiter to cosmology so
I'm just reminding myself here at like
the main point for just sending off a
few more quick emails and packing up to
head out again like I'm gonna be meeting
myself coming back here but BBC Oxford
is up in awesome town a 30 minute walk
or so so to save my poor feet and some
precious research time I usually just
hop on the bus for five minutes up to
summer town because first handedly
stopped right now side the BBC I wait
outside in the waiting room and then the
producer of the show comes and gets me
and leads me through the back and into
the studio and here's Lily she's
wonderful I love her she's so
enthusiastic about space so obviously we
get on and she asked all the right
questions as well you know people at
home are also thinking so he's just
getting me set up with all the
microphone and the fancy headphones that
ashram all the song ends and then she
introduces me astrophysicist dr. Becky
Smith it's lovely to have you as we do
every month we're gonna gaze skywards to
begin with can I just say how gorgeous
the moon is looking yeah so full and
bright isn't it it's so low down as well
and then for the rest of time she gives
me free reign to explain to people you
know how to catch satin in the sky and
the upcoming Geminids meteor shower
I also saw its peril the smallest black
hole found so far that can tell us how
big stars have to be when they die to
make black holes I hand I talk about the
current crisis in cosmology where none
of the data agree on the current age of
the universe and we don't really know
what to do anymore it means there could
be lots of new physics which is super
exciting I think it's so important to
talk about this sort of stuff on local
radio because for one the research is
happening like so close to people every
day and also taxpayers partly fund this
research as well so we should always
communicate findings back to them but
enough glamorous video for one day back
to the office now and viral bus again
where I thought I could fill myself
reading over my notes from the seminar
before lunch but no camera board great
rescue it make sure the phone is okay if
you didn't crack my screen is she
looking really I'm a physicist I should
have seen that one coming
damn gravity
but off we go back towards the city
center this is just down the main road
but it's a really pretty route anything
as I'm starting to sound a bit like a
tour operator now but anyway we're going
back past the physics building that
weird massive Tower used to be like the
particle accelerator back in the fifties
but now it's the PhD student offices
which is pretty cool I never had a desk
in there unfortunately I kind of missed
out a little bit but I did get an office
with a giant window which is more than I
can say for my office now your looks
made of glass but back up my desk I made
under the hot squash and then sat down
to work or actually approached the John
Lewis Christmas supper first that dragon
Edgar is adorable and a veritable kind
of table Christmas time anyway back to
that statistical test on my sample of
galaxies I was working on this morning
I wasn't very hopeful that it would come
out with anything significant because I
have such a small number of galaxies
after matching to the data that I have
and I was right if I had 10 times the
galaxies it would have been a
significant difference so I guess it'll
just be a waiting game for the data that
I need to come through I'm doing all of
this analysis using Python and 2x2
notebook so for those who are curious I
think that's my one piece of advice to
any aspiring researcher or scientist out
there is to learn to code because you
know you don't want to be doing all of
this data science with huge samples in
like a spreadsheet because it's not fun
just after three it was time to head
back upstairs to find the seminar
speaker from before I want to talk to
him about his work and how it
specifically fits in with mine and
specifically a hypothesis that I have so
I know looks at what happens on those
small scales right down there a black
hole and how the material is taken in
there I think about how the material
that's taken in or even thrown back out
before it even makes it past the event
horizon affects the surrounding
large-scale of the galaxies so for my
most recent paper I came up with a
scheme to explain the findings that we
had for black holes that had grown by a
very calm feeding compared to those that
had grown through very chaotic feeding
from like merges of galaxies and so from
what we found I wanted to run this
theory by him and see what he thought
and he gave me a lot to think about
especially thinking about what
assumptions had gone in to our results
beforehand and
that could be affecting our conclusions
and our findings back downstairs to my
desk though I'm putting some nail oil on
here because cuticle care is important
people and I've got about 25 minutes
before my next meeting so I decided to
put a tweet out about my latest video
that went up last night when I was
filming this so I started clipping about
30 seconds of it to post my colleague
walks in though and asked me if I can
help with a favor and then we had to go
to chat about science for a couple of
minutes where we were both up see when I
worked you know just catching each other
up I updated him on my chat with hi know
for example then I finished clipping my
video convert it to a format alert to
where taraji likes and then I posted the
third tweet then I wrote a note just
reminding myself of what hi know and I
had talked about so that when I come
back to it another day I won't have
forgotten so I quickly check my emails
again and then I grabbed that paper I
printed out earlier today ready to head
to journal club with my group which
includes my PhD student tobias say I
justify us everybody and I was getting
caught again so I made myself another
hot squash this time in my favorite book
boy with the poodles already then the
professor in our group Chris joined us
and we got chatting about each the
papers we brought so I brought one on
feedback from supermassive black holes
obviously that's my thing spires brought
one on how star formation in galaxies
and grade dense environments so like big
clusters of galaxies is usually lower
and Chris brought one on a special type
of star in the Milky Way no one person
can be an expert on everything so this
is why it's good to get people together
to go over new results because you get
differing viewpoints you get different
analyses you get different hypotheses
that come out of it and get ideas for
what you might want to do next like
what's the next observation on a
telescope that you want to make like
what data do you need to get that's sort
of the standard process in astronomy you
get an idea you apply for time on a
telescope either an optical or a radio
or an x-ray whatever it might be
hopefully you then get awarded that time
and you get to go observing either in
like Hawaii or Harbor Australia or Chile
or somewhere like that then you get to
come back and analyze the day to figure
out what it's telling you about the
universe and then publish a journal
article on it before the whole process
starts again and other people around the
world they're discussing your paper at a
journal club somewhere it's why no two
days as scientists ever the same but I
guess this one kind of gives you a good
reflection with journal club finished it
was time to get changed before the
public talked tonight ready for a fancy
dinner later you have no idea how
pleased with myself I am that that shot
worked is editing Becky a real editor
now anyway the walk to the other physics
building took me a bit longer in my
heels this time but I got myself a good
spot before the lecture theater filled
up with members of the public arriving
for the talk as well hi no did such a
good job explaining radio astronomy the
center of our galaxy observations of the
stars orbiting the supermassive black
hole there and also just gravity itself
as well to communicate why things are so
weird around a black hole and maybe what
would happen to anything falling in this
was all to lead up to how him and the
event horizon telescope team managed to
make that amazing image of the
supermassive black hole that's four
billion times more massive than the Sun
at the center of the galaxy Messier
seven he explained all about how the
telescopes are combined across the
entire earth to make a telescope with
essentially an effective diameter of the
earth and how the data was then combined
to make the image I got very excited at
one point when he talked about plans to
take this one step further and put a
telescope into space or even on the moon
to make the effective diameter of the
telescope even bigger like as big as
space something we actually call space
into a barometer II but the snippet of
information I took with me from this
talk was that 4.5 billion people
worldwide have seen that image of m87
which is a truly incredible achievement
where the talk and the Q&A session all
done you can see I got very excited
about space interferometry in my notes
there was a drinks reception afterwards
so that members of the public could
interact with Heino and also members of
the physics department to ask more
questions about what they've just heard
but then later it was off to dinner in
College Oxford colleges are one of the
best parts about being an Oxford it's
where the undergraduates live and are
taught and it's kind of like a whole but
with more of a community and sort of a
familial vibe to it for me it's just a
great place to socialize with other
academics who aren't business and to be
involved in this great community that's
really steeped in history as well like
our College was founded by Henry the
eighth's so there's so much history when
you walk these halls you can see though
it was very dark outside by this point
so here's some shots I took in the light
another day and some of you might
recognize it especially the stairs and
the balcony of the Paul this is
Christchurch but it's also the first
thing of Hogwarts that you see in the
Philosopher's Stone
[Music]
welcome to Hogwarts like never found
traveller and look that's the balcony
where Hermione's never better
never better what else we do usually eat
in Hall at high table as a researcher in
the College tonight
we're in a fancy side room for this like
special dinner which is called the
McKenna room which I love because it has
this gorgeous fireplace and it's so
old-school as well with like all the
portraits on the wall there's this huge
one of Queen Elizabeth behind me as well
and we all got little nametags of the
college chefs are so good so as the food
really is incredible and they do such a
good job and I wish I had that level of
skill what's nice is that these lectures
and dinners are twice yearly thing yeah
and there's an impressive list of people
that have given these lectures in the
past including two Nobel Prize winners
and some names you might recognise from
me covering their work on this channel
before as well I kind of hope to one day
see my name on a list of lectures like
this too now I didn't film anything at
dinner because well that would be rude
but trust me when I say the food was
amazing but then it was time for my
Cinderella - to catch my train home
after a very very long but productive
and enjoyable day it might not have
looked much to some but this is truly my
dream job and I get to do it all again
tomorrow
you